# Harvard FAS Informatics Python Intensive Workshop

## Developer notes

This workshop is in the form of [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/) notebooks (`.ipynb`). When running the workshop, students run the notebook on [Google colab](https://colab.research.google.com/), ensuring easy setup and equivalent environments for all students. We also convert and host these notebooks on our website. In order to have hidden and expandable "Solution" code blocks for exercises in both contexts, there are a few things we need to do while editing the notebooks. These should require minimal effort on our part.

### When editing a notebook (`Python-PartN.ipynb`)

> ⚠️ **Important:** **You only ever need to edit the regular notebooks (`Python-PartN.ipynb`)! Do not edit `*-student.ipynb` files or `*.md` files directly! Your edits will be overwritten.** See below for explanations of these files.

#### Coding exercises

1. All coding exercises must have two associated code blocks: a student block, in the state the students should see the exercise before starting, and a **solution block**, with the final, working example coded.
2. **Solution blocks** MUST begin with the following comment: `#@title Solution {display-mode: "form"}`. This allows the block to be hidden in Google colab.
3. **Solution blocks** MUST be *tagged* as `solution`. This allows for these blocks to be processed when converting formats for the website. Tags can easily be added to a Jupyter notebook in VSCode by selecting the code block, clicking `...` in the menu that appears in the upper left corner of the codeblock, and selecting "Add Cell Tag". A dialogue window will pop-up on the top of the VSCode window where you can enter the tag. Type "solution" and hit enter. The tag should now appear at the bottom of the code block.

#### Non-coding exercises

For non-coding exercises, wherever applicable hide the solution in `<details></details>` tags. This HTML is rendered as a hidden and expandable block in both in Google colab and by our website. For example:

```html
<details><summary>Solution</summary>
This is the solution to the exercise!
</details>
```

Will render as:

<details><summary>Solution</summary>
This is the solution to the exercise!
</details>

### But wait, why is there still a `-student.ipynb` file?

Isn't the point of all this to maintain only one notebook?? Correct.

The `-student.ipynb` files are generated automatically by the `.github/scripts/jupyter_convert.py` script when changes are made to the notebooks. These are identical to the regular `.ipynb` files, but with all rendered output stripped. We want to ensure we distribute this version to the students so they get a clean notebook after we may have edited and run some code in them. All changes made to the regular notebook files will be automatically be reflected in their corresponding `-student.ipynb` file.

### And why does each notebook have an associated markdown file?

The markdown files (`.md`) are also automatically generated by `.github/scripts/jupyter_convert.py`. These are the files that we link to on our website and contain formatting for that context.

> ⚠️ **TL;DR:** You never have to touch the `-student.ipynb` or `.md` files. They are automatically generated and reflect changes in the regular notebook files. In fact, **never edit these files directly since your edits will be overwritten**.

### What if I edit a notebook to add an image or change the order in which the images appear?

We add alt-text to the images automatically in `.github/scripts/jupyter_convert.py`. Unfortunately, since some of these images are programmatically generated (*e.g.* plots from the seaborn section), the best solution I could come up with was to hardcode in the alt-text strings in the order in which they appear in the document and add them in sequence upon conversion to markdown.

This means if you ever add an image or re-order the images, `.github/scripts/jupyter_convert.py` will have to be updated to reflect the new image/image order.

